[OSPO Book] add preface and chapter one draft for review (#282)
todogroup/ospology: ospo-book/chapters/01-chapter.md

# Chapter 1: Introduction to Open Source Program Offices

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Assessing Readiness for Open Source and OSPO](#assessing-readiness-for-open-source-and-ospo) - `✅ Assesment`
- [Antipatterns](#antipatterns) - `🚫 OSPO Antipatterns`
- [Resources](#resources) - `📚 Continue Here`

# Introduction

> Open source technology has become an integral part of modern organizations, offering a range of benefits, including lower costs, increased collaboration, and access to a vast pool of talent and resources. However, with the growing importance of open source, organizations need to be equipped to manage their open source operations effectively, in order to realize these benefits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Technology developed with open source methodology has become an integral part of modern organizations, offering a range of benefits, including lower costs, increased collaboration, and access to a vast pool of talent and resources. However, with the growing importance of open source, organizations need to be equipped to manage their open source operations effectively, in order to realize these benefits.
```

Reviewer: In my view developing or creating technology with open source methodology also means that the technology is openly available. Maybe this could be explained somewhere. The term 'open source technology' is not clear for me as open source is a licensing model and/or a methodology.

I agree that open collaboration is a per-requisite to succeed in open source.

Author: Make clear the differentiation between methodologies, culture, collaboration, etc. Would be a good idea to set up a glossary.md to discuss/define these terms (and future ones) that we use in this book (for this context). Focus on cross-referencing and be concise.

Reviewer 2: Concur on a glossary.

One solution to this challenge is the creation of an Open Source Program Office (OSPO). An OSPO is a dedicated team or department within an organization that is responsible for managing the organization's open source operations, including the development, distribution, and use of open source software.

> In this book, we will guide organizations through the process of creating and implementing an OSPO, providing practical advice and best practices on how to streamline open source operations, and ensuring that organizations are able to maximize the benefits of open source technology.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this book, we will guide organizations through the process of creating and implementing an OSPO. We will provide practical advice and best practices on how to streamline open source operations, and ensuring that organizations are able to maximize the benefits of open source technology, while being good open source citizens.
```

The book is structured in a user-friendly and practical manner, with a focus on providing actionable advice and steps that organizations can take to create and implement an OSPO. The book will cover a range of topics, including:

> * Understanding the value of open source program offices within organizations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Understanding the value of OSPOs within organizations
```

# Chapter 1: Introduction to Open Source Program Offices

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Assessing Readiness for Open Source and OSPO](#assessing-readiness-for-open-source-and-ospo) - `✅ Assessment`
- [Antipatterns](#antipatterns) - `🚫 OSPO Antipatterns`
- [Resources](#resources) - `📚 Continue Here`

# Introduction

> Open source technology has become an integral part of modern organizations, offering a range of benefits, including lower costs, increased collaboration, and access to a vast pool of talent and resources. However, with the growing importance of open source, organizations need to be equipped to manage their open source operations effectively, in order to realize these benefits.

Author: ```suggestion
Open source has become an integral part of modern organizations, offering a range of benefits, including lower costs, increased collaboration, and access to a vast pool of talent and resources. However, with the growing importance of open source, organizations need to be equipped to manage their open source operations effectively, in order to realize these benefits.
```

Author: dropping "technology" in this sentence to avoid confusion. We can add "open source technology" definition in the new glossary.md

Creating an Open Source Program Office (OSPO) can accelerate a company's or organization's open source journey from mindset change to efficient policies and workflows. An OSPO is a dedicated team or department within an organization that is responsible for managing the organization's open source operations, including the development, distribution, and use of open source software, and harmonizing and integrating these with product development.

> In this book, we will guide organizations through the process of creating and implementing an OSPO. We will provide practical advice and best practices on how to streamline open source operations, and ensuring that organizations are able to maximize the benefits of open source technology, while being good open source citizens.

Reviewer 4: In those three paragraphs, there are too many `,` and `and`. I could understand well because I know what each section means. But other people like beginners may struggle with understanding each description. 
What about making the list with bullet points, or providing a picture such as a mindmap?

Author: good idea!

> In this book, we will guide organizations through the process of creating and implementing an OSPO. We will provide practical advice and best practices on how to streamline open source operations, and ensuring that organizations are able to maximize the benefits of open source technology, while being good open source citizens.

Reviewer 4: > In this book, we will guide organizations through the process of creating and implementing an OSPO. We will provide practical advice

There are repeating `we will` in the two continuous sentences. How about adding `In addition` to the second sentence? 

> In this book, we will guide organizations through the process of creating and implementing an OSPO. `In addition,` we will provide practical advice

> In this book, we will guide organizations through the process of creating and implementing an OSPO. We will provide practical advice and best practices on how to streamline open source operations, and ensuring that organizations are able to maximize the benefits of open source technology, while being good open source citizens.

Reviewer 5: A small textual improvement: I would change "We will provide practical advice and best practices on how to streamline open source operations, and **ensuring** that organizations **are able to** maximize the benefits of open source technology, while being good open source citizens. " to : We will provide practical advice and best practices on how to streamline open source operations, and **ensure** that organizations **can** maximize the benefits of open source technology, while being good open source citizens."

> In this book, we will guide organizations through the process of creating and implementing an OSPO. We will provide practical advice and best practices on how to streamline open source operations, and ensuring that organizations are able to maximize the benefits of open source technology, while being good open source citizens.

Author: ```suggestion
In this book, we will guide organizations through the process of creating and implementing an OSPO. The book provides:
* Practical advice and best practices on how to streamline open source operations
* Recommendations to ensure that organizations are able to maximize the benefits of open source technology while being good open source citizens.
```

- [Antipatterns](#antipatterns) - `🚫 OSPO Antipatterns`
- [Resources](#resources) - `📚 Continue Here`

# Introduction

Open source has become an integral part of modern organizations, offering a range of benefits, including lower costs, increased collaboration, and access to a vast pool of talent and resources. However, with the growing importance of open source, organizations need to be equipped to manage their open source operations effectively, in order to realize these benefits.

Creating an Open Source Program Office (OSPO) can accelerate a company's or organization's open source journey from mindset change to efficient policies and workflows. An OSPO is a dedicated team or department within an organization that is responsible for managing the organization's open source operations, including the development, distribution, and use of open source software, and harmonizing and integrating these with product development.
In this book, we will guide organizations through the process of creating and implementing an OSPO. The book provides:
* Practical advice and best practices on how to streamline open source operations

> * Recommendations to ensure that organizations are able to maximize the benefits of open source technology while being good open source citizens.

Author: ```suggestion
* Recommendations to ensure that organizations can maximize the benefits of open source while being good open source citizens.
```

Whether you're just starting out on your open source journey, or are looking to streamline your existing operations, this book will provide you with the knowledge and tools you need to create and implement a successful Open Source Program Office.

In the following chapters, we will explore the key components of an OSPO, and provide practical guidance and best practices on how to create and implement an OSPO within your organization, regardless of your industry or sector. So let's get started!

## OSPO Definition

An *Open Source Program Office (OSPO)* is a center of expertise, either virtual or physical, that supports, nurtures, shares, explains, and grows open source within an organization. An OSPO *role* can be conceived as an umbrella term, covering the responsibilities for defining and implementing strategies and policies that guide open source efforts and provide tools, processes, and knowledge to organization teams and experts in navigating open source without harming the open source ecosystem. Instead, they help to sustain it while achieving organizational goals.

>  OSPOs (as center of expertise) may comprise a framework built around some or all of the following aspects:

Reviewer 3: This section reads a little confusing to me as well. It also doesn't read as a definition, but it rather talks about what the org does, in some extent, and what responsibilities it has.

I would focus on really just defining here what the term actually means. I would establish that it is a group of people with the goals of X, Y and Z.

Then we can have subsections that talk about the OSPO's responsibilities, structure, job roles within that org and even suggest where it might sit within a bigger organization to be able to make impact.

>  OSPOs (as center of expertise) may comprise a framework built around some or all of the following aspects:

Author: During yesterday's call, we agreed to come up with a different word to define the "different hats" that people within an OSPO play. The "persona" term was discussed but is also highly related to marketing definition and might create confusion.

>  OSPOs (as center of expertise) may comprise a framework built around some or all of the following aspects:

Author: [From Contirbutor's call discussion] two differentiations might unblock this: OSPO as the entity and the people behind an OSPO (that includes roles, skillsets, etc)

* Set policies related to code use, distribution, selection, auditing, and other key areas
* Provide education and training to internal and external stakeholders involved in open source activities
* Ensure legal compliance
* Promote community engagement

> OSPO (as a role) can include:

Reviewer 3: This is a little confusing to me. Is the goal here to use these terms/roles below later in the book?

To me the actions that the roles cover read more as responsibilities of an OSPO. However, as it is currently structured, it looks a little bit like we're hinting a bit to create these roles within the org.

Reviewer 6: We discussed in a meeting and the idea of "persona" was brought to light, although it may mean something different in marketing circles.

The term started becoming more mainstream and diverse in the last years, as more organizations from different sectors and regions included dedicated open source roles in their organization to manage open source operations and strategy. Nowadays, we can find OSPOs being formed in different regions (APAC, EMEA, AMER) and entities, such as Governments, Enterprises, NGOs, Universities and more.

> Important Considerations in Defining an Open Source Program Office (OSPO): OSPOs vary in Sector, Region, and Organizational Size; May Exclude the Term 'Program' to become 'Open Source Office'; and No Two OSPOs are Alike.

# Assessing Readiness for Open Source and OSPO

`✅ Assesment`

The purpose of this section is to first identify the strengths, weaknesses, and opportunities for improvement within the organization, 
and to help determine if an OSPO is the right solution for the organization's needs based on their existing open source engagement level, culture and understanding. 

> ## Where do Open Source and OSPO converge?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Where do Open Source Software Development and OSPO converge?
```

> In the past, open source software was primarily used by small groups of developers and enthusiasts, and there was little need for dedicated organizational units to manage open source activities. However, as open source software has become more prevalent and critical to the operation of many organizations, the need for dedicated OSPOs has become more apparent.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the past, collaborative open source software development was primarily adopted by small groups of developers and enthusiasts, and there was little need for dedicated organizational units to manage open source activities. However, as this method has become more prevalent and critical to the operation of many organizations, the need for dedicated OSPOs has become more apparent.
```

### Understand existing and desired open source adoption

> Once an organization has assessed the level of open source used, contributed, or produced in the organization and why establishing an OSPO can help an organization manage the risks and opportunities of what open source, open works and collaboration brings, and ensure that its open source activities are effectively managed and aligned with the organization's strategic goals and objectives. 

Reviewer: What is open work?

Reviewer 3: This is a very long sentence and I don't understand what it is intended to say.

Author: @CsatariGergely this link provides a clear definition 👍 http://openworkdefinition.com/ 

The reason for why including this term is because usually non-corporate OSPOs, focus not only on open source software, but also on other "works" topics such as artwork, open data, hardware, and more.

> While this is a book about Open Source Programs Offices (OSPOs), it is important to note that establishing an OSPO is not the starting point for open source operations. Before establishing an OSPO (and keep reading the content of the book), it is critical to assess your organization's level of open source adoption and readiness for open source operations. Open source software adoption varies widely across organizations, and it is important to understand your organization's current level of adoption and the level of knowledge and understanding of open source within your organization.

Reviewer 3: Is there any valid case where creating an OSPO could be a starting point? Or one of the starting points?

Reviewer 3: This and the below paragraph refer to 'open source adoption' and 'open source software adoption' without defining what these actually mean.

In this section I would rather be more practical and say that a companies and organizations need to assess their current goals and relationship with using and collaborating to open source software projects. And that below we're providing a framework and a checklist to assess and better understand their current stage and next steps.

* **☑️ Culture:** Evaluate the culture within your organization to determine if it is conducive to open source operations. Is there a culture of collaboration and sharing? Are the different actors that will be or are currently involved in open source willing to contribute to open source projects?

* **☑️ Tools and Processes:** Evaluate the tools and processes in place to support open source operations. Are there any existing tools or processes that can be leveraged for open source operations? Are there any gaps in tools or processes that need to be addressed?

* **☑️ Addressing Gaps:** Determine if there are any gaps in open source adoption or readiness and develop a plan to address them. This may include training those actors that will be or are currently involved in open source on open source software usage and licensing, developing new tools and processes to support open source operations, or establishing an OSPO to coordinate open source activities.

* **☑️ Overall, gather input from stakeholders on these areas** by asking the folowing questions

>     * What does open source means for the organization?

Author: ```suggestion
    * How would you define 'open source'?
    * What does 'open source' mean for you and your organization?
```

>     * What does open source means for the organization?

Reviewer 3: I would ask people to both define the term and talk about what it means:

* How would you define 'open source'?
* What does 'open source' mean for you and your organization?

>     * Is there an open source culture within the organization?

Author: ```suggestion
    * How would you define the 'open source culture' within your organization?
```

>     * Is there an open source culture within the organization?

Reviewer 3: I would rather ask:

How would you define the 'open source culture' within your organization?

They can still say non-existent, but it is more likely that they can identify any issues or misunderstandings, or just realize the lack of it.

    * What are the organization's goals and objectives for using open source?

>     * How is open source software currently being used and /or created (contirbution) within the organization?

Reviewer: I would separate the usage and contributions to two bullet points. Maybe even three by adding a contributions in general and creating own open source projects separately.

Reviewer 3: I would actually drop this question and would rather ask the above question in the context of contributing:

What are the organization's goals and objectives for contributing to open source projects?

Author: separate them. Maybe include the segment tags for concrete questions?

Reviewer 2: It is important to note that use and contribution are two different actions, and one can do one without the other. Separation is probably useful.

    * If any, what are the current policies and procedures for managing open source software within the organization?

>     * What are the key legal and compliance considerations for using open source software within the organization?

Reviewer 3: Also add:

What are the key legal and compliance considerations for contributing to open source software projects within the organization?

>     * What are the challenges and opportunities for implementing an OSPO within the organization?

Author: ```suggestion
    * What are the motivations for implementing an OSPO within the organization?
    * What are the challenges of implementing an OSPO within the organization?
```

>     * What are the challenges and opportunities for implementing an OSPO within the organization?

Reviewer 3: I would split this into two:

* What are the motivations for implementing an OSPO within the organization?
* What are the challenges of implementing an OSPO within the organization?

    * What resources and support will be needed to successfully implement an OSPO within the organization?
    

> ### Understand knowledge transmission through the eyes of OSPO

Reviewer 3: I interpreted the below section as how the OSPO org itself operates as well as how it interacts with other entities within and outside of the company or organization. In my view, that doesn't entirely translates to knowledge transmission.

I would rather call this section 'OSPO Organization and Interactions' or smth similar along these lines.

Author: `knowledge sharing` (external vs internal) as a better word?

> RE ML disussion: https://lists.todogroup.org/g/ospo-book-project/message/5

> If the organization decide to establish an OSPO (as entity) or integrate OSPO roles, it is crucial to assess the transmission of knowledge to different internal and external *open source players* that have a direct or indirect impact on the OSPO. This section examines the OSPO from four different perspectives:

Reviewer 3: I still have a hard time with using the OSPO term for both an entity as well as a group of roles. I think it is very easy to associate to job roles and functions, rather than the responsibilities that we listed above.

* Looking downward: as the head of an OSPO, managing the team's tasks is a fundamental responsibility. Depending on the OSPO's objectives, the team's responsibilities may vary, but effective management is essential.

* Looking upward: if proposing the creation of an OSPO, managing expectations and aligning with executives' technology needs is necessary.

* Looking sideways: collaboration with other teams is critical. For instance, in business-oriented OSPOs, collaborating with the dev tools and security teams is necessary.

* Looking outside: representing the organization to external communities and foundations is crucial. The integration strategy must align with the organization's objectives and vision.

As an example, the following [diagram](https://lists.todogroup.org/g/ospo-book-project/message/5) illustrates the various players in a business-oriented OSPO and the different methods of interaction, communication, and knowledge transmission.

> <img width="908" alt="img2" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43671777/224132683-6a2abdff-c846-4db3-b642-c2e32b5734fb.png">

Reviewer: I think we should store the images in tree and also the editable versions of the images.

Author: +1! I can prepare an /img folder with the images and fix the links accordingly 👍

In Chapters 3 and 6, we will delve deeper into how an OSPO can effectively address knowledge transmission across various open source players and highlight some best practices utilized by different organizations.

## Antipatterns

`🚫 OSPO Antipatterns`

> While Open Source Programs Offices (OSPOs) can provide significant benefits for organizations, there are also bad practices that organizations should avoid if they don't want to lead to negative consequences for both the organization and the open source ecosystem. Here is a set of examples that illustrates what an OSPO is not about, and how to avoid common pitfalts:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While Open Source Programs Offices (OSPOs) can provide significant benefits for organizations, there are also bad practices that organizations should avoid if they don't want to lead to negative consequences for both the organization and the open source ecosystem. Here is a set of examples that illustrates what an OSPO is not about, and how to avoid common pitfalls:
```

> * **Establishing an OSPO without proper alignment with organizational goals:** An OSPO should not be established just because it is a trend or because other organizations have them. Without proper alignment, an OSPO can become a waste of time, resources, and money

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Establishing an OSPO without proper alignment with organizational goals:** An OSPO should not be established just because it is a trend or because other organizations have them. Without proper alignment, an OSPO can become a waste of time, resources, and money.
```

> * **Viewing an OSPO as a separate silo within the organization:** it should be integrated into the organization's existing structure and collaborate with other teams to achieve common goals

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Viewing an OSPO as a separate silo within the organization:** It should be integrated into the organization's existing structure and collaborate with other teams to achieve common goals.
```

## OSPO Definition

An *Open Source Program Office (OSPO)* is a center of expertise, either virtual or physical, that supports, nurtures, shares, explains, and grows open source within an organization. An OSPO *role* can be conceived as an umbrella term, covering the responsibilities for defining and implementing strategies and policies that guide open source efforts and provide tools, processes, and knowledge to organization teams and experts in navigating open source without harming the open source ecosystem. Instead, they help to sustain it while achieving organizational goals.

 OSPOs (as center of expertise) may comprise a framework built around some or all of the following aspects:

* Set policies related to code use, distribution, selection, auditing, and other key areas
* Provide education and training to internal and external stakeholders involved in open source activities
* Ensure legal compliance
* Promote community engagement

> OSPO (as a role) can include:

Reviewer 5: One role I think is misses is the role that focus on ensuring Open Source Compliancy. My understanding is that their are OSPO that purely focus on that.

* **☑️ Culture:** Evaluate the culture within your organization to determine if it is conducive to open source operations. Is there a culture of collaboration and sharing? Are the different actors that will be or are currently involved in open source willing to contribute to open source projects?

* **☑️ Tools and Processes:** Evaluate the tools and processes in place to support open source operations. Are there any existing tools or processes that can be leveraged for open source operations? Are there any gaps in tools or processes that need to be addressed?

* **☑️ Addressing Gaps:** Determine if there are any gaps in open source adoption or readiness and develop a plan to address them. This may include training those actors that will be or are currently involved in open source on open source software usage and licensing, developing new tools and processes to support open source operations, or establishing an OSPO to coordinate open source activities.

> * **☑️ Overall, gather input from stakeholders on these areas** by asking the folowing questions

Reviewer 5: One question that I think is missing is "how much open-source software is already being used in the organisation?" My experience is that asking this question will help your stakeholder to get more aware of the crucial role open source already plays in the organization. Most stakeholders are unaware of how much open source is used in their organization and the risks that it is not yet professionally managed.

    * How would you define 'open source'?
    * What does 'open source' mean for you and your organization?

>     * How would you define the 'open source culture' within your organization?

Author: ```suggestion
    * How much open-source software is already being used in the organization?
    * How would you define the 'open source culture' within your organization?
```

    * What are the organization's goals and objectives for using open source?

>     * How is open source software currently being used and /or created (contirbution) within the organization?

Author: ```suggestion
    * How is open source software currently being used (usage) within the organization?
    * How is open source software currently being created (contribution) within the organization?
```

    * If any, what are the current policies and procedures for managing open source software within the organization?
    * What are the key legal and compliance considerations for using open source software within the organization?
    * What are the motivations for implementing an OSPO within the organization?
    * What are the challenges of implementing an OSPO within the organization?
    * What resources and support will be needed to successfully implement an OSPO within the organization?
    

> ### Understand knowledge transmission through the eyes of OSPO

Author: ```suggestion
### Understand knowledge sharing through the eyes of OSPO
```

Whether you're just starting out on your open source journey, or are looking to streamline your existing operations, this book will provide you with the knowledge and tools you need to create and implement a successful Open Source Program Office.

In the following chapters, we will explore the key components of an OSPO, and provide practical guidance and best practices on how to create and implement an OSPO within your organization, regardless of your industry or sector. So let's get started!

## OSPO Definition

> An *Open Source Program Office (OSPO)* is a center of expertise, either virtual or physical, that supports, nurtures, shares, explains, and grows open source within an organization. An OSPO *role* can be conceived as an umbrella term, covering the responsibilities for defining and implementing strategies and policies that guide open source efforts and provide tools, processes, and knowledge to organization teams and experts in navigating open source without harming the open source ecosystem. Instead, they help to sustain it while achieving organizational goals.

Author: ```suggestion

[WHAT] An Open Source Program Office (OSPO) is a center of expertise, either virtual or physical, whose people support, nurture, share, explain, and promote the growth of open source within an organization.

[WHO] OSPOs are composed of people (open source specialists) wearing different hats:

* Open Source Enabler: OSPOs can help organizations navigate the cultural, process, and tool changes required to engage with the open source community effectively. This can involve educating teams/ units, establishing new processes and workflows, and adopting new tools and technologies.

* Open Source Counselor: OSPOs can provide guidance and advice on the latest open source trends, licensing issues, and how to engage with open source projects, foundations, and communities. This can help organizations stay up-to-date with the rapidly changing open source landscape and ensure they are making informed decisions.

* Open Source Advocate: OSPOs can promote the use and/or contribution of open source and best practices across different organizational units. This can help organizations realize the benefits of open source as well as engaging people to contribute to open source projects or start new ones.

* Open Source Environmentalist: OSPOs can help organizations support and sustain open source projects in the long term by addressing issues such as security, maintenance, and project health. This can involve establishing policies and procedures for code review, security vulnerability management, and ongoing maintenance and support through funding and/or contributions. By doing so, OSPOs can help ensure that open source projects remain healthy and continue to benefit the wider community.

[HOW] The way the people behind an OSPO achieve this is by creating and maintaining a framework covering the following aspects: strategy, governance, compliance, and community engagement. The OSPO's strategy focuses on aligning the organization's open source goals with its overall organization objectives.

[WHY] An OSPO serves as a vital bridge between an organization and the open source community, helping to ensure that the organization is a good steward of open source software and can reap the benefits of open source adoption while minimizing risks.
```

Author: @gkunz @ildikov @Jonasvdbo can you please review this new definition? 🙂

Author: FYI: committing these changes to close the PR, and created an issue to ensure that we can revisit this definition if necessary at a later time 👍 https://github.com/todogroup/ospology/issues/295
